.TH KRC 1 2016-03-31
.SH NAME
krc \- Kent Recursive Calculator
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B krc
[\fIoptions\fR] [\fIfile\fP] [\fIarguments\fP] ...
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB-h\fR \fIcells\fR
Specify the size of the heap.
On a 32-bit computer, each cell requires
16 bytes, on a 64-bit computer 32 bytes.
The default is 128000 cells.
.TP
\fB-d\fR \fIbytes\fR
Specify the size of the dictionary, or "string space",
used to store identifiers, comments and strings.
The default is 64000 bytes.
.TP
\fB-n\fR
Don't include the prelude of standard definitions.
.TP
\fB-l\fR \fIlib\fR
Use \fIlib\fR in place of the prelude.
.TP
\fB-L\fR
Use a legacy prelude from 1981 in place of the prelude.
.TP
\fB-s\fR
Load prelude or \fIlib\fR stripped of comments (saves string space).
.TP
\fB-c\fR
Turn on reduction counting (the same as the \fB/count\fR command).
.TP
\fB-g\fR
Turn on garbage collector statistics (the same as the \fB/gc\fR command).
.TP
\fB-o\fR
Turn on the printing of compiled objects (the same as the \fB/object\fR command).
.TP
\fB-z\fR
Sets base for list indexing to 1 instead of 0 (legacy option).
.TP
\fB-e \fIexpression[?!]\fR
Instead of being interactive, evaluate \fIexpression\fR and display its
value (with `?') or flat-print the value (with `!').
.PP
If a file name is given after the options, its contents will
be loaded as the \fIcurrent script\fR.
If you don't give a file name the current script is initially empty.
.PP
Arguments following the file are permitted only when a \fB-e\fP option
is present and in this case the file name and any arguments are placed
in a list of strings called "\fBargv\fP".
.SH DESCRIPTION
Kent Recursive Calculator was one of the earliest higher-order, lazy,
purely functional programming systems. Written around 1980, it was a
simplified version of its author's language SASL,
developed at St Andrews University in 1972-6, and in turn was succeeded
by Miranda, the main precursor of Haskell. These days it has the
advantages of being a simple language of this kind capable of running
in very little memory (75KB code plus whatever space is allocated for
heap and dictionary).
.PP
A KRC program is called a \fIscript\fP, which consists of
a sequence of \fIdefinitions\fP each of which consists of an
optional comment followed by one or more \fIequations\fP, one per line.
.PP
When you invoke krc, it loads a set of standard
definitions called the \fIprelude\fP, then prints a welcome
message followed by a prompt, \fBkrc>\fP.  You have now entered a KRC \fIsession\fP.
In a session you can type commands, expressions to be evaluated, and 
definitions to be entered in the current script.
A new prompt appears as each task is completed, until you end the session.
.SH COMMANDS
The interpreter accepts a range of commands
to inspect, edit, load and save scripts,
as well as a few system-oriented things.  Each command is
entered on a single line, followed by [Enter].
.PP
The command to inspect a definition, say of `foo', is just the name
on a line by itself
.br
\ \ \ \ foo
.br
the system responds by displaying the definition associated with
`foo', which may be in the prelude or in the current script.
If the definition has more than one equation these are shown
numbered, from \fB1\fP, the numbers are used when editing definitions.
.PP
You can display a section of the script, say from 
the definition of `foo' to `bar' by typing
.br
\ \ \ \ foo\ ..\ bar
.br
.PP
The other commands all start with a \fB/\fR character.
.TP
\fB/\fR
Displays all of the current script
.TP
\fB/quit\fP
Ends a KRC session. Shorthand:\ \fB/q\fP.
Typing control-D also has this effect.
.PP
Be aware that ending a session does not automatically save the current
script, for that you must use \fB/save\fP (see below).
.PP
In the commands which follow `\fIname\fP' means 
one of the names defined in the current script;
.PP
Where it says `\fIname(s)\fP'
you can put a name, several names separated by
spaces, or a range 
\fIfoo\fB..\fIbar\fR which refers to definitions \fIfoo\fP through \fIbar\fP
of the current script,
or \fIfoo\fB..\fR which means from the definition of \fIfoo\fP
to the end of the script.
.PP
Where it says `\fIpart(s)\fP', this refers to equation numbers 
from a definition in the script, for deletion or reordering.
.PP
A \fIpart\fP can be a single number like \fB1\fP,
a range like \fB2..4\fP, 
something like \fB4..\fP, which means from 
equation \fB4\fP to the end of the definition;
\fIpart(s)\fP means a list of these separated by spaces.
.TP
\fB/delete\fP \fIname(s)\fP
Deletes one or more definitions from the script.
Shorthand:\ \fB/d\fP
.br
If no 
\fInames\fP are supplied, it deletes the whole script (\fBbeware!\fP).
.TP
\fB/delete\fP \fIname\fP \fIpart(s)\fP
Deletes the numbered equations from the definition of \fIname\fP.
To delete the comment, enter an empty comment for the same name,
for example "foo:-;"
.TP
\fB/reorder\fP \fIname\fP \fIname(s)\fP
Place the definitions of one or more \fInames\fP immediately after those
for the first mentioned \fIname\fP, in the order shown.
.TP
\fB/reorder\fP \fIname\fP \fIpart(s)\fP
Reorder the equations within a definition by moving the
numbered equations listed in \fIpart(s)\fP to the top of the
definition, in the order shown.
.TP
\fB/aborder\fP
Sorts the script's definitions into alphabetical order.
.TP
\fB/rename\fP \fIfrom\fB,\fIto\fR
Change the name `\fIfrom\fP' into `\fIto\fP', in all
the places where it is used in the
script; \fIfrom\fP and \fIto\fP can both be lists of names
separated by spaces, in which case the first name in \fIfrom\fP is
changed to the first name in \fIto\fP and so on. This allows you
to swap two or more names in the script without losing any of them.
.TP
\fB/save\fP \fIfilename\fP
Saves the script in the named file.
If \fIfilename\fP is omitted, it saves to the last filename mentioned.
.TP
\fB/get\fP \fIfilename\fP
Adds the contents of a file to the script.
If \fIfilename\fP is omitted, from the last filename mentioned.
.TP
\fB/file\fP
Shows the current default filename. Shorthand:\ \fB/f\fP
.TP
\fB/file\fP \fIfilename\fP
Changes the default filename.
.TP
\fB/list\fP \fIfilename\fP
Lists the contents of a disk file, like Unix's "cat" or DOS's "type" commands.
If the \fIfilename\fP is omitted, it reads from the last filename mentioned.
.TP
\fB/dir\fR
List the filenames in the current directory or folder, like Unix's "ls"
or DOS's "dir" commands.
.TP
\fB/names\fP
Displays the names defined in the script.
.TP
\fB/lib\fP
Displays the names defined in the prelude.
.TP
\fB/openlib\fP
Allows you to modify the definitions of the prelude (they are normally write-protected).
Any changes are made to the copy of the definitions held in memory during
the session - only if you use \fB/save\fP (filename) do they get written to a file.
.TP
\fB/clear\fP
Clear all memo fields.  When a simple definition in the script is expanded
i.e. one like \fBfoo\fP = STUFF, the value is stored in a memo field for \fBfoo\fP
so STUFF need not be evaluated again. These are cleared automatically when any
definition in the script is changed.
.TP
\fB/count\fP
Turns on reduction counting.
.TP
\fB/gc\fP
Enables the printing of memory usage information each time a
garbage collection happens.
.TP
\fB/reset\fP
Turns off reduction counting, garbage collection information 
and object display (see below).
.TP
\fB/dic\fP
Report current state of string space.
.TP
\fB/help\fR
Prints a list of help topics. Shorthand: \fB/h\fR
.TP
\fB/help\fR \fItopic\fP
Displays the relevant helpfile, using the UNIX command `\fBless\fR'.
This allows you to move backwards
(type `b') in the file as well as forwards (type SPACE, or ENTER to move
forward one line at a time), type `q' to quit.  Say `\fBman\ 1\ less\fR'
on the UNIX command line for more details.
.PP
These last commands are for use in debugging the system:
.TP
\fB/object\fP
Displays the internal representation of each expression before evaluating it.
.TP
\fB/lpm\fP
The "List Post Mortem" displays the KRC machine's internal state.
.SH EXPRESSION EVALUATION
An \fIexpression\fP is a mathematical formula denoting a value. For details
of what can be in an expression see later sections:
IDENTIFIERS, DATA TYPES, OPERATORS and ZF EXPRESSIONS.
To evaluate an expression in a KRC session and print the result
on the screen, type the expression followed by `\fB?\fP'.
.PP
For example, you could type \fB2+2?\fP to obtain \fB4\fP.
.PP
If the value is a data structure it is printed as you would enter it, with
quote marks around strings,
square brackets around lists and commas between list elements.
For example (`++' joins lists together):
.PP
\ \ \ \ \fBkrc>\fP [1..3]++["...\\n"]++[2*2]?
.PP
\ \ \ \ \fB[1,2,3,"...\\n",4]\fP
.PP
Note that with `\fB?\fP' control characters in a string are shown,
not obeyed ("\\n" means newline).
.PP
An alternative method of printing uses `\fB!\fP' in place of `\fB?\fP'.
.PP
\ \ \ \ \fBkrc>\fP [1,2,3,"...\\n",4]!
.PP
\ \ \ \ \fB123...
.br
\ \ \ \ 4\fP
.PP
`\fB!\fP' prints strings without quotes, obeying any control characters, numbers
are printed in the usual way and with lists
`\fB!\fP' scans left to right, recursively scanning any sublists encountered,
printing only the atoms (numbers and strings).
The effect is as if the data were squashed flat and joined up
into a single string (although `\fB!\fP' does not actually use
any additional string space).
.PP
As a general guide `?' (print values to show structure) is used when developing
and testing functions and `!' (flat-print) for the final output of a program
where you want to control layout.
Note that `?' adds a trailing newline while `!' doesn't.
.PP
The reader may find it helpful to study the function \fBshow\fP defined in the
prelude; 
.RS
\fBx?\fP
.RE
is actually equivalent to
\fBshow\ x\ :\ ["\\n"]!\fP
.PP
\fBReminder\fP: For KRC to print the value of an expression it must be followed
by `\fB?\fP' or `\fB!\fP'.
.SH THE SCRIPT: COMMENTS AND EQUATIONS
A KRC script consists of a sequence of \fIdefinitions\fP, each of which
is composed of an optional \fIcomment\fP followed by one or more \fIequations\fP.
The order of the definitions has no significance as they are all in scope
throughout the script, but the order of
the equations within a definition may affect its meaning, as they are tried
in the order written.
.PP
A comment is the name, of a function or other data item, followed by the two
characters "\fB:-\fP" followed by any number of lines of text
and terminated by the first semicolon "\fB;\fP".
.br
\ \ \ \ flub :- here is some text
.br
\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ ... explaining "flub";
.PP
An equation is one line of a definition and has this form:
.RS
\fBLHS = expression\fP
.RE
or
.RS
\fBLHS = expression, guard\fP
.RE
where \fBLHS\fP ("left hand side") is a
name optionally followed by formal parameters and \fBexpression\fP
describes the value which the lhs assumes in this case.
.PP
The optional \fBguard\fP is a Boolean (i.e. truth-valued) expression which determines
if the equation is applicable. If the guard evaluates to "TRUE"
the equation is used, otherwise it is not.
.PP
Note that equations are written one per line
(no terminating semicolons needed, or allowed).  Examples
.RS
radix = 10
.br
girls = ["susan","jill","pandora"]
.RE
are simple definitions.  A simple definition has just a name as its LHS.
.PP
We can define a function by introducing a formal parameter
.RS
sq n = n * n
.RE
The formal parameter `n' is a local variable of the equation.  Any name
can be used as a formal parameter, it does not have to be a single letter.
However name clashes, like using `sq' as a formal parameter when it
is also a top-level name, are best avoided (occurences of the name
on the right of the equation will refer to the formal parameter).
.PP
Names which appear at the head of an LHS, which to this point are
`radix', `girls' and `sq', are known as \fItop-level names\fP and have the whole
script as their scope, as do the names defined in the prelude.  (The scope of 
a name is the region of text in which it can be used with the same meaning.)
.PP
Here is a function of two parameters
.RS
sqdiff m n = m*m - n*n
.RE
We call it by writing e.g.
.RS
sqdiff 2 3
.RE
not sqdiff(2,3) as you would in some other programming languages.
.PP
More complex function definitions
may require several equations, for example
.RS
fac 0 = 1
.br
fac n = n * fac(n-1)
.RE
defines a factorial function which can then
be used, for example by writing
.RS
fac\ 10?
.RE
Note the use of a constant, 0, as formal parameter in the first equation.
This is one way to do case analysis.
.PP
Guards can also be used to do case analysis.
A safer version of `fac' would be:
.RS
fac n = 1, n <= 0
.br
\ \ \ \ \ \ = n * fac(n-1)
.RE
Here we use a guard, `n <= 0', to stop `fac' going into a loop on negative numbers.
Entering an equation with no left hand side
means that the LHS is the same as in the line previously entered.
.PP
We have seen that a formal parameter can be a name or a literal constant.
It can also be a pattern to match list structure as in this example \-
`rotor' carries out a simple rotation on lists of length 3.
.RS
rotor [a,b,c] = [b,c,a]
.RE
.PP
To match lists of unknown length we use a pattern involving `:',
for example the functions `hd', `tl', which return the first element
of a list, and the remainder of the list without the first element, are defined
.RS
hd (a:x) = a
.br
tl (a:x) = x
.RE
.PP
Another example is this function which copies lists of length <=2 and extracts
the first 2 elements of lists with length >2.
.RS
take2 [] = []
.br
take2 [a] = [a]
.br
take2 (a:b:x) = [a,b]
.RE
Note that ':' is right associative so `a:b:x' means `a:(b:x)'.
.PP
In summary, an LHS consists of the name being defined followed by zero
or more formal parameters.  Each formal parameter can be 
.RS
a \fIname\fP like \fBx\fP or \fBheight\fP
.br
a \fIliteral\fP number or string like \fB3\fP or \fB"bill"\fP
.br
a \fIpattern\fP like \fB[p,q,r]\fP or \fB(a : x)\fP
.br
where any of the p, q, r, a, x could themselves be a name, literal or pattern.
.RE
Names introduced by formal parameters are local to the equation in
which they appear.
.PP
An equation with
one or more patterns in its LHS applies when the actual parameters
of a function invocation
match the corresponding formal parameters; that is they have the same list
structure and, where the pattern contains a literal, the values are equal.
If there is also a guard, that must evaluate to "TRUE".
.PP
Where a definition has more than one equation they must all have the
same number of formal parameters.  Notwithstanding this, it is possible
in KRC to define functions which take a variable number of arguments,
because the right hand sides can be of varying type. (Terminology \- 
the actual parameters of a function are also called its \fIarguments\fP.)
.PP
KRC supports the interactive development of scripts.
.PP
To enter definitions in the script during a session you simply type in the
equations and comments at the prompt, one at a time.  You can then enter
expressions to test your definitions and edit them (i.e. delete,
reorder etc) using the COMMANDS listed earlier and re-enter equations as
needed.  The line editing facilities provided by "linenoise" and/or
the use of a mouse to cut and paste make this task relatively easy.
.PP
If you enter an equation with the same LHS and
guard as an existing one it will replace it.  Entering a comment will replace an
earlier comment on the same name.  To delete a comment enter an empty replacement
.RS
name :-;
.RE
.PP
Another way of proceeding is to use an editor to create the script and
then start a krc session with it as the file.  The 
KRC system was designed to allow it to be used without a separate editor (back
in 1980 screen editors like \fBvi\fP and \fBemacs\fP were not widely
available as they are now).
.SH IDENTIFIERS
The names used in scripts and expressions are built from
\fBA-Z\fP \fBa-z\fP \fB0-9\fP underscore (\fB_\fP) and apostrophe (\fB\'\fP),
start with a letter
and can be of any length.  Case is significant, so X and x are different identifiers.
Note that KRC has no reserved words.
.SH DATA TYPES
KRC has four data types: numbers, strings, lists and functions.
.PP
The four types of value have the same "civil rights" \- any value can be (i) named,
(ii) included in a list, (iii) passed to a function
as its argument, (iv) returned by a function as result.
.PP
There is no static type system \- values of different types can be freely mixed, for
example as elements of a list and a function can accept
arguments of more than one type and return results of different 
types for different inputs.  
Type errors, e.g. trying to multiply two strings, are detected at
run time.  Languages of this kind (LISP is another example) are often
called `typeless', but \fIdynamically typed\fP is more accurate.
.PP
A value can be tested by the four functions `number', `string', `list' and
`function' and returns "TRUE" for one of these,
"FALSE" for the others. There is also a function `char' which recognises
strings of length 1 and a function `bool' which reconises the strings "TRUE" and "FALSE".
.PP
\fBNumbers\fP are integers (whole numbers, positive, negative and zero)
written in the usual decimal notation, e.g. 3 -17 500
.PP
\fBStrings\fP are sequences of characters enclosed in double quotes, e.g.
.RS
"cattle" "oh my!"
.RE
.PP
Control characters are written using `\\', e.g. "\\n" is newline.
The escape conventions are as in C
.RS
\\a (bell) \\b (backspace) \\f (formfeed) \\n (newline) \\r (carriage return)
\\t (tab) \\v (vertical tab) \\\\\ (backslash) \\' \\"
.RE
and numeric character codes
.RS
\\ddd (up to three decimal digits).
.RE
KRC character codes are in the range 0\-255 (of which 0\-127 are ascii,
the meaning of codes above 127 depends on the \fIlocale\fP).
.PP
Note the strings "TRUE", "FALSE" are used as truthvalues,
there is no separate Boolean type.
.PP
KRC has no separate type `character' distinct from `string'.
A character is just a string of length 1, e.g. "a"
(you cannot write this as \'a\', that would not be recognised).
.PP
The prelude function `explode' converts a string into
a list of characters, e.g. 
.RS
\fBkrc>\fP explode "hello"?
.br
["h","e","l","l","o"]
.RE
.PP
KRC treats strings as atomic; they are stored uniquely in packed
form.  Strings can be tested for equality or order without unpacking them but
to access the internal structure you must use `explode'.
.PP
There is a function `implode' which compresses a list of strings into a
single string, but this is less often needed.  Processing of textual
data is typically done on lists of characters (or sometimes trees)
and given `!' there is no need to convert
the result back into a single string before printing.
.PP
\fBLists\fP are written using square brackets and commas between
elements, e.g. [1,2,3,"eric"].  Note
the empty list, [] and singletons, e.g. [3].
.PP
An important operation on lists is `\fB:\fP' which prefixes an element
to the front of a list.  So `a:[]' is `[a]', `a:b:[]' is
`[a,b]' and so on.
Note also the `\fB++\fP' operator which appends one list to another.  The
elements  of `x++y' are those of `x' followed by those of `y'.
.PP
As some, or all, of the elements of a  list can be lists it
is possible to construct multi-dimensional arrays (as lists of lists of ...)
and more generally trees, of any shape.
Lists can be of infinite length, for example
.RS
ones = 1 : ones
.RE
is an infinite list of ones and
.RS
abyss = ["down",abyss,"up"]
.RE
is a tree of infinite depth.  These examples are possible because of KRC's general strategy
of \fIlazy evaluation\fP, which includes not evaluating the parts of a structure until they are accessed.
.PP
There is a notation `[a..b]' for a sequence of consecutive integers, e.g. `[-10..10]'
is a list with 21 elements.  This notation also has an infinite form, e.g. `[2..]'
is a list of the integers starting at 2.
.PP
Similarly the notation `[a,b..c]' can be used for an arithmetic sequence running
from a to c with step (b-a).  E.g. [1,3..99] are the odd numbers from 1 to 99.
Again this has an infinite form, e.g. [0,-5..]
.PP
A list can be applied to a non-negative number, n say,
to extract its n'th element (counting from 0). So given
.RS
x = ["mon","tue","wed","thu","fri"]
.RE
then `x 0' is "mon", `x 6' is "fri", and `x 7' is an error.
A list can therefore be supplied in a context where a function is expected, for example
as an operand of `.' the functional composition operator.
.PP
\fBFunctions\fP: a function calculates an output
value from given input value(s).  The rules of calculation are given by its defining equations
(except for a few built-in functions defined in machine code).
.PP
Applying a function to its input values (or \fIarguments\fP) is done by juxtaposition, e.g.
.RS
f x y
.RE
If an argument is an operator expression or another function application
it needs parentheses to force the correct parse. E.g.
.RS
f (g x) (y+2)
.RE
.PP
A prefix or infix operator in single quotes
denotes the corresponding one- or two-argument function, e.g.
.RS
ops = [\'+\', \'-\', \'*\', \'/\']
.RE
is a list of the four functions of arithmetic.  See below, under OPERATORS.
.PP
\fIContinued application\fP: a function application can return a function,
e.g. (ops n) is a function, which one depends on `n'.
We can immediately apply this to its arguments, thus
.RS
ops n x y
.RE
We could write `(ops n) x y' but the parentheses are not needed as
function application is \fIleft associative\fP.
.PP
\fIPartial application\fP: a function of two or more arguments
can be applied to a smaller number of arguments and
the result is a function that is waiting for the remaining arguments.
For example
.RS
double = \'*\' 2
.RE
is a function that can be applied to a number and will multiply it by 2.
.PP
Partial application works because KRC uses a model of functions
derived from \fIcombinatory logic\fP.  In this model, all functions
actually take a single argument.  An n-ary function, for n>1, is a
function that, when applied to its argument, returns an (n-1)ary
function that is waiting for the next argument. So taking the case
n=3 as an example
.RS
\fBf a b c\fP
.RE
means
.RS
\fB((f a) b) c\fP
.RE
but because of the left-associative rule the parentheses are normally omitted.
.SH OPERATORS
The following table lists KRC's prefix and infix operators in order of increasing binding
power.
.PP
The second column gives associativity:- a left associative operator, e.g. `-' has
.RS
\fBa - b - c\fP \ ==> \ \fB(a - b) - c\fP
.RE
while a right associative operator, e.g. `++' has
.RS
\fBa ++ b ++ c\fP \ ==> \ \fBa ++ (b ++ c)\fP
.RE
Infix operators in the same row have the same binding power and are jointly
right or left associative.
.PP
The third column gives a brief statement of meaning.
Where needed the notes below add further detail.
.TS
l l l
l l l.
\fBoperator\fP	\fBassociativity\fP	\fBmeaning\fP
:  ++  --	right	list prefix, append, listdiff
|	right	logical \fIor\fP
&	right	logical \fIand\fP
\\	prefix	logical \fInot\fP
> >= \\= == <= <	see below	comparisons
+ -	left	add, subtract
+ -	prefix	plus, minus
* / %	left	multiply, integer divide, remainder
** .	right	exponent, function-compose
#	prefix	length of list
.TE
.PP
The application of a function to its arguments binds more tightly
than any operator.  Parentheses \fB(...)\fP can be inserted freely
in expressions to enforce the intended parse or to make it clearer to the reader
\- redundant parentheses do not change the meaning (this is true both in expressions
and in formal parameters).
.PP
The operators \fB:\fP (prefix) and \fB++\fP
(append) have been discussed earlier, in the section on DATA TYPES.
The expression \fBx -- y\fP returns a list of the elements of \fBx\fP without
those that appear in \fBy\fP, the exact definition is given by the 
prelude function \fBlistdiff\fP.
.PP
The logical operators \fB|\fP, \fB&\fP do not evaluate their second operand
if this is not needed.
.RS
\fBa\ |\ b\fP
.RE
returns "TRUE" if \fBa\fP is "TRUE", otherwise it returns \fBb\fP.
Similarly
.RS
\fBa\ &\ b\fP
.RE
returns "FALSE" if \fBa\fP is "FALSE", otherwise it returns \fBb\fP.
.PP
The relational operators \fB>\fP, \fB>=\fP, \fB==\fP, \fB<=\fP, \fB<\fP have a special syntax which allows
continued relations, as commonly used in mathematics books.  For example
.RS
\fB0 <= x <= 10\fP \ means \ \fB0 <= x & x <= 10\fP
.br
\fBa == b == c < 0\fP \ means \ \fBa == b & b == c & c < 0\fP
.RE
.PP
The operators \fB==\fP and \fB\\=\fP can be used to test for equality or inequality
on any pair of values, returning "TRUE" or "FALSE". Values of different types
are always unequal.  Two lists count as equal if and only if they are of the
same length and (recursively for sublists) corresponding elements are equal.
.PP
Equality tests between functions give unpredictable results and should 
not be used.
(Example: `\fBmap\ ==\ map\fP' has value "TRUE" but
`\fBmap\ abs\ ==\ map\ abs\fP' is "FALSE".)
.PP
The order testing operators \fB> >= <= <\fP work on numbers in the usual way and
on strings compare according to the C function \fIstrcmp()\fP.  For
words all in upper case, or all in lower case, this amounts to dictionary order,
but be aware that upper case letters
precede lower case letters, so "ZEBRA"\ <\ "ant". It is an error to test
lists or functions for order, or two values of different type.
.PP
\fB + - * /\fP are the usual arithmetic operations, with \fB%\fP for remainder.
KRC arithmetic deals only with integers thus `\fB/\fP' discards the
fractional part, rounding towards \fB0\fP, while
\fBa % b\fP takes the remainder on dividing `\fBa\fP' by `\fBb\fP',
the sign of the result being that of `\fBa\fP' (these rules
for integer division and remainder are the same as C).
.PP
Prefix `\fB-\fP' reverses the sign of its integer operand (leaving \fB0\fP unchanged).
A negative constant like `\fB-1\fP' is, syntactically, an operator
expression and must be parenthesised when passed to a function, thus
`\fBf(-1)\fP' whereas `\fBf\ -1\fP' would attempt to subtract \fB1\fP
from \fBf\fP. Prefix `\fB+\fP' does nothing and is discarded.
.PP
\fBa ** b\fP raises `\fBa\fP' to the power of `\fBb\fP' which must be
non-negative.
.PP
The composition of two functions `\fBf\ .\ g\fP' is defined as follows
.RS
\fB(f . g) x \ = \ f (g x)\fP
.RE
.PP
The operator \fB#\fP gives the length of a list, for example `\fB#[1,2,3]\fP'
is \fB3\fP.  To find the length of a string use the prelude function
\fBprintwidth\fP.
.PP
A prefix or infix operator in \fIsingle quotes\fP denotes the corresponding one-
or two-argument function.  For example \fB\(fm+\(fm\fP is the addition function
and \fB\(fm#\(fm\fP and \fB\(fm\e\(fm\fP are functions
which take the length of a list and the negation of a truthvalue.
Note that \fB\(fm-\(fm\fP
is subtraction, for unary minus you can use the prelude function \fBneg\fP.
.SH ZF EXPRESSIONS
ZF expressions are a notation to generate lists from other lists.
(These would now called \fIlist comprehensions\fP, a
term coined by Phil Wadler in 1985.)
.PP
We start with some simple examples
.RS
\fB{n*n; n<-[1..]}\fP
.RE
is a list of all square numbers [1,4,9,16,25...].  The expression before
`;' is the \fIbody\fP of the ZF expression while `n<-[1..]' is called
a \fIgenerator\fP and `n' is a local variable of the ZF expression.  The effect
is to create a list of the values taken by the body for each value of `n'
drawn from the list given in its generator.
.PP
The next example is a function for finding the factors of a number
.RS
\fBfactors n = {r; r<-[1..n/2]; n%r==0}\fP
.RE
This makes a list of the numbers between 1 and n/2 which divide n exactly.
The expression after the second semicolon is called a \fIfilter\fP \- only
those values of the generator are used for which the filter is "TRUE".
.PP
A ZF expression can have two or more generators, so
.RS
\fB{a+b; a<-[1,2,3]; b<-[10,20,30]}\fP
.RE
gives you a list of nine two-digit numbers.
.PP
Our last example finds
all positions on a chess board which are a knight's move from [x,y]
.RS
\fBknights_move [x,y] = {[i,j]; i,j<-[1..8]; (i-x)**2 + (j-y)**2 == 5}\fP
.RE
Searching the whole board in this way is not very efficient, but never mind.
Note that `i,j<-[1..8]' is shorthand for two generators with i, j
both drawn from [1..8].
.PP
The general form of a ZF expression is
.RS
\fB{expression; qualifier; ... ; qualifier}\fP
.br
with one or more qualifiers, each of which is either a \fIgenerator\fP, of the form
.br
\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ name-list <- expression
.br
or a \fIfilter\fP, which is an expression whose value is "TRUE" or "FALSE".
.RE
.PP
If the first qualifier is a generator, which is usually the case,
the initial `\fB;\fR' can be written `\fB|\fR', which aids readability.
.PP
For examples of programming with ZF expressions see
David Turner's papers "The Semantic Elegance of Applicative Languages'' (1981)
and "Recursion Equations as a Programming Language" (1982).
.PP
(\fBHistorical note\fR: The semantics of ZF expressions in KRC differ from
those of modern list comprehensions
in \fIinterleaving\fP outputs of multiple generators
to ensure that all combinations are eventually reached,
even with two or more infinite generators.  The motivation was to make them behave
more like set comprehensions, whence the use of {}.  List comprehensions
with square brackets and the now familiar "nested loop" semantics first appeared
in Miranda, in 1984.)
.SH THE PRELUDE
When KRC is started it first loads the \fBprelude\fP, a library of standard definitions,
most of which are in KRC but some are in machine code, including functions to access
the operating system (e.g. \fBread\fP, \fBwrite\fP).
.PP
To list the names defined in the currently loaded prelude during a KRC session, type
.RS
\fB/lib\fP
.RE
You can inspect any of the definitions by typing the name, e.g.
.RS
\fBmap\fP
.RE
Each has an comment explaining what it does, in addition to its defining equations.
.PP
The standard prelude is usually at \fB/usr/lib/krc/prelude\fP but may be placed
elsewhere by the installer. To view the standard prelude in a KRC session, say
"\fB/help prelude\fP".
.PP
Another library in place of the standard prelude can be specified 
on the command line when KRC is invoked by the option \fB-l \fIlib\fR.
If you invoke KRC with option \fB-n\fP, no prelude is loaded.\"\fBchar__ chr__ explode__ function__ implode__ list__ number__ ord__ printwidth__ read__ seq__ string__ write__\fP
.PP
If KRC is invoked with option \fB-L\fR, a legacy prelude
is used in place of the standard one. To view this in a KRC session, say
"\fB/help lib1981\fP".
.PP
Note that without a prelude you cannot use ZF expressions,
whose implementation requires \fBinterleave\fP
nor can you use the `\fB--\fP' operator, which
requires the function \fBlistdiff\fP.
.SH LINE EDITING AND ESCAPE TO UNIX SHELL
\fBLine editing\fP: if KRC is compiled with the "linenoise" module,
the arrow keys and other keys can be used to scroll back and forth through
lines typed in a KRC session, to edit and resubmit them.
For a summary of available key bindings, with and without "linenoise",
say \fB/help keys\fP in a KRC session.
.PP
\fBEscape to Unix shell\fP:
type Ctrl-Z to suspend KRC and return to Unix command line,
say \fBfg\fP to resume the KRC session.
.SH MAKING UNIX COMMANDS
You can write a Unix command in KRC by making its script
executable through the "magic string" mechanism. To do this,
add a line as the start of the script, of the form:
.RS
#! /usr/bin/krc -e \fIexpression\fP!
.RE
where \fIexpression\fP is to be evaluated when
the program is run.  This can be a KRC expression
of any complexity, terminated by `\fB?\fP' if its value is to be shown
with its structure or `\fB!\fP' if it is to be flat-printed.
.PP
Other flags such as "\fB\-l\ \fIlib\fR" for an alternative prelude,
"\fB\-h\ \fIsize\fR" for a larger heap, can precede "\fB-e\fP".
.PP
The name by which the script is called, followed by the command-line arguments
that the user supplies when it is run,
are placed in a list of strings called "\fBargv\fP".
.PP
Example: A simple command to display the contents of files.
Put the following 2 lines in a file called "list".
.RS
 #! /usr/bin/krc -e main!
.br
 main = map read (tl argv)
.RE
then make it executable
.RS
 chmod +x list
.RE
now you can use it, for example
.RS
 ./list list
.RE
will display the contents of the file itself.
.PP
Any KRC script can be made executable by placing a "magic string" at the start.
When used as the script in an interactive KRC session an initial line in `#!'
is treated as a comment and ignored; it has effect only if the file is invoked
as a command on the Unix command line.
.SH LANGUAGE CHANGES
The KRC language described here is as David Turner designed it around 1980,
except for the following changes.
.PP
The base for indexing lists has been changed from \fB1\fR to \fB0\fR.
The option \fB-z\fP reverts to lists being indexed from 1 (this may be
needed for legacy KRC scripts dating from the 1980's).
.PP
A revised prelude has been provided, with some more efficient definitions
(e.g. \fBreverse\fR, \fBsort\fP) and a more modern collection
of functions.
A legacy prelude from 1981
is also available (option \fB-L\fP).
.PP
Escape characters in strings, "\\n" etc., as in C, have been added.
KRC as originally designed used instead names for special characters: \fBnl\fP
\fBnp\fP \fBquote\fP \fBtab\fP \fBvt\fP,
these remain in the prelude.  Example:
instead of \fB"123\\tgo\\n"\fP you can say \fB["123",tab,"go",nl]\fP
to get the same effect with ``!''.
.PP
A distinction has been introduced between `\fB=\fP', definitional equals
and `\fB==\fP' the equality test (KRC originally used `\fB=\fP' for both).
.PP
In-line comments, from "||" to end of line, have been added, thus
.RS
        || this is a comment
.RE
these don't fit very naturally with KRC's model  of  interactive  script
development  as  they  are  discarded  when  entered  during a
session.  But the facility is useful for scripts prepared  with  an  editor  as
it allows comments on individual equations and on the whole script.
.SH LEGACY SYNTAX
With option \fB-z\fP these alternative operator forms are accepted
and converted to their standard variants:
.RS
\fB~\fR  as a synonym for \fB\e\fR (prefix \fInot\fR)
.br
\fB~=\fR as a synonym for \fB\e=\fR (\fInot-equals\fR)
.br
\fB=\fR as a synonym for \fB==\fR (\fIequality test\fR)
.RE
.SH LIMITATIONS
Guards do not work correctly with simple definitions, for example
.RS
feb = 29, leap_year
.br
\ \ \ \ = 28
.RE
fails with strange error when leap_year="FALSE".
The language as originally defined did not allow guards with simple
definitions, only with functions.  The syntactic restriction has been removed
but the corresponding semantics still needs fixing.
.PP
The length of a string limited to 255 characters.
The space used by strings created during a session is never freed,
mitigated only by the fact that multiple copies of the same
string are shared. This means that programs which create a
lot of temporary strings as part of their operation
will soon run out of the space in which strings,
identifiers, file names and comments are stored.  Note, however,
that KRC's ``\fB!\fP'' output mode removes much of the need to create
temporary strings.
.PP
Numbers are limited in range to that of the underlying processor's
machine word, i.e. they are signed 32-bit or 64-bit integers.
Calculations which exceed this range cause a run-time error.
.PP
If linenoise is enabled, multiline comments cannot be entered interactively
in a KRC session.
.SH FILES
.TP
\fB/usr/lib/krc/prelude\fP
The standard prelude.
.TP
\fB/usr/lib/krc/lib1981\fP
A legacy prelude dating from 1981 (invoked by option -L).
.PP
KRC looks for the prelude first in \fB./krclib\fP if present,
then in \fB/usr/lib/krc\fP (this may be changed by the installer).
.SH SEE ALSO
.TP
\fBhttp://krc-lang.org/\fP
The KRC home page.
.TP
\fBRecursion Equations as a Programming Language\fP, D. A. Turner, January 1982
This includes an overview of the KRC language and can be found at the above website.
.TP
\fBhttp://github.com/antirez/linenoise\fP
The "linenoise" line-editing module (the version included with the KRC sources has
been lightly edited to configure it appropriately).
.SH AUTHOR
The KRC system was designed by David Turner
who implemented it in BCPL for the EMAS operating system from
November 1979 to October 1981.
.PP
This implementation was created by translating the original BCPL sources into C for
the Unix family of operating systems.
.PP
KRC is Copyright (c) D. A. Turner 1981 and is released under an open source license,
for terms see the file "COPYING" included in the distribution.
